One of the most mysterious characters in A
Song of Ice and Fire and Game of Thrones is
Varys, the “master of whisperers” – or
“spymaster” – at King’s Landing, also
called “the Spider” for his “vast web
of informers”. Varys is a schemer and a
manipulator , a master of disguise and illusion, and a keeper of secrets. Whenever anything
important happens at court, he’s there – watching,
whispering, “spin[ning] his secret webs”.
What’s this guy up to? Who is he, really, and what does he want?
Let’s start at the beginning. Varys was
born not in Westeros, but in a city called
Lys , as “an orphan boy”, and apparently
a slave . He tells us that he grew up with
a “troupe of mummers” – mummers are
actors, or performers – but one day in Myr,
he was sold to a sort of a sorcerer, who cut
off Varys’ cock and balls and burned them
in a magic ritual. Varys was left for dead
on the streets, but he managed to survive
and became a great thief . When he was driven
from Myr, he went to Pentos, and formed a
“criminal partnership” with a young Illyrio
Mopatis. Varys trained children to work for
him as thieves, like a sort of a Fagin without
balls , and came to learn that “Secrets
are worth more than silver or sapphires”
– so Varys’ thieves stole information,
which eventually made Varys and Illyrio rich
and powerful. Meanwhile, in Westeros, King
Aerys Targaryen was going mad, convinced that
everyone around him was plotting against him
– so when Aerys heard about Varys’ “talents”,
he brought him to King’s Landing to serve
as his “spymaster” . In the following
years, Varys “crouch[ed] at the king’s
side, whispering in his ear” like Grima
Wormtongue, feeding Aerys’ paranoia , which
probably contributed to Aerys’ madness,
and ultimate downfall in Robert’s Rebellion.
It doesn’t seem that Varys intended this,
though, because he apparently tried to stop
Aerys from opening his gates to the Sack of
King’s Landing . Anyway, Varys continued
in his role as master of whisperers under
the new king, Robert Baratheon. He learned
all the secret passageways around the Red
Keep , he built up his network of spies – mostly
mute children who he calls “little birds”
, and he solidified his power, by making people
need him, convincing them that he’s on their
side , making sure he’s too useful – and
knows too much – to be gotten rid of .
And eventually the series begins. Varys’
actions, as seen through the eyes of Eddard
and Tyrion and others – are… confusing.
In Book 1, Varys warns Ned that the Lannisters
want to kill Robert , he reports on Daenerys
Targaryen to the small council using Jorah
as his spy , though we later find out Varys
also protects Dany . Varys suggests the dismissal
of Barristan Selmy from the Kingsguard , and
he tries to save Eddard from execution . In
Clash, Varys is helpful and almost friendly
with Tyrion , helping him run the city, and
protect his relationship with Shae, but in
Storm he testifies against Tyrion in his trial
, but then he helps save Tyrion from execution
and leads him to kill Tywin before sending
him to Pentos. Then Varys disappears from
King’s Landing , leaving a coin in the dungeons
that makes Cersei mistrust the Tyrells , and
he’s gone for all of Feast, but at the end
of Dance, he turns up out of nowhere, and
murders Pycelle and Kevan Lannister . What’s
he trying to achieve with all this, what’s
the goal here? It’s really hard to see Varys’
motivations, because he does everything indirectly,
and secretly, and subtly, but it is possible
to piece together his grand plan.
Back in the very first book, we see that Varys
is conspiring with his “old friend” Illyrio
Mopatis, who arranges the marriage between
Daenerys Targaryen and Khal Drogo. We’re
told that the plan at this point is to use
Drogo’s Dothraki army to invade Westeros
and crown Dany’s brother Viserys as King
. But Viserys dies, then Drogo dies, and Daenerys
ends up the queen of Meereen, so in the show,
the plan now seems to be to help Daenerys
take over Westeros . But in the books, it’s
more complex. There’s this boy called Young
Griff, who Varys and Illyrio claim is actually
Aegon Targaryen, the son of Prince Rhaegar,
and nephew of Daenerys, widely believed to
have been killed as an infant during Robert
Rebellion . Varys and Illyrio say they secretly
rescued Aegon from the war , and have been
raising him ever since to be a perfect king
for Westeros .
Which raises the question of what they were
planning to do with Viserys – Viserys and
Aegon can’t both be king. One likely explanation
is that Varys and Illyrio lied , and never
actually intended for Viserys to be King – and
why would they? He’s crazy , and cruel,
and would obviously make a bad ruler . Aegon,
on the other hand, seems a pretty decent kid,
and has a better claim to the Throne, and
has been “shaped for rule since before he
could walk” by Illyrio and Varys’ people
– they clearly want Aegon, not Viserys,
on the Throne. So why do they try to give
Viserys a Dothraki army, why tell him to invade
Westeros? The plan seems to have been to use
Viserys’ Dothraki invasion of Westeros as
a way of destabilising and distracting Westeros,
making it easier for Aegon to turn up later
and take over. Compared to crazy Viserys and
his “savage” foreign army, Aegon would
look like the good guy – “A savior come
from across the sea to bind up the wounds
of bleeding Westeros” . Of course, after
Viserys dies, the plan changes – for a while,
they try to get Aegon and Daenerys together,
to marry, and join their forces, and invade
Westeros together , but that doesn’t work
out and Aegon ends up invading Westeros without
her, landing in the Stormlands with an army
called the Golden Company in Dance. So the
plan has changed a lot throughout the series
, but the overall goal seems to have remained
the same – to make Aegon Targaryen the King
of Westeros.
This really helps to understand Varys’ actions
throughout the series. Early on, he’s trying
to “delay” any conflict in Westeros until
Viserys is ready to invade – so he tries
to protect Robert and Ned from the Lannisters,
and he maintains an appearance of loyalty
by informing on Daenerys, while on the downlow
he’s supporting her, not only by protecting
her from assassination, but by sending useful
people like Ser Barry, and later Tyrion, to
help her. By the end of Storm, Varys changes
his strategy, trying to destabilise and weaken
the Lannister regime in preparation for Aegon’s
invasion – so he leads Tyrion to kill Tywin,
he drives apart Cersei and the Tyrells, and
he kills Kevan Lannister, the last person
at this point who’s really holding the realm
together. All throughout the series, Varys
is working to pave the way for Aegon’s invasion
. But – why?
Varys endlessly says that he “serve[s] the
realm”, that he’s “a loyal servant of
the realm” , and the realm needs peace”
. If that’s true, why does he create conflict
and chaos and try to start a war to install
Aegon as King? If Varys wants a good Targaryen
king, he should have just supported Prince
Rhaegar, all those years ago – Rhaegar sounds
like he would have been a great ruler , and
since he was Aerys’ rightful heir, there
would have been no war required to make him
King. But Varys actively worked against Rhaegar,
by warning the Mad King against him , possibly
even urging Aerys to disinherit him, so that
crazy kid Viserys would get the Throne instead
. If Varys really wants a good king and a
peaceful realm, why did he undermine Rhaegar?
And later, under King Robert, the realm enters
a period of peace and prosperity – the World
of Ice and Fire calls it a “golden era”
. Admittedly, there is that massive debt , probably
cause of Littlefinger, but still, the realm’s
doing really well. So why does Varys spend
this time plotting to ruin the peace, start
a war, and install a new king? After Robert
dies, things do get bad in the War of the
Five Kings – which again is mostly Littlefinger’s
fault – but the war does end, and the realm
starts getting back into pretty good shape
under Tommen. Varys says himself that Kevan
Lannister does a good job of starting to “make
peace” and “unit[e] the Seven Kingdoms
under Tommen’s rule” . But instead of
supporting what could have become a peaceful,
stable regime, Varys again undermines the
peace by killing Kevan, creating conflict,
and continuing the plot of Aegon’s invasion
. That’s three potentially peaceful and
prosperous regimes that Varys has actively
undermined. If Varys really just wants a peaceful
realm, why does he keep doing this? What possible
reason could he have to support this kid Aegon
above all others?
Varys suggests that Aegon would be a great
king. He says he’s been trained, educated,
instilled with good values, “shaped for
rule since before he could walk” . But isn’t
it extremely naïve to believe that training
can guarantee that someone will be great king?
Aegon is just a teenager, with little experience
of the real world – he’s barely even been
to the realm he intends to rule. Even if Aegon
does turn out to be a great king, what’s
stopping his heir or successor from being
just as bad as Mad Aerys? Within just a generation,
Varys’ grand plan could easily leave Westeros
in a worse position than it was in in the
first place. And that’s if the plan even
works – if Aegon is defeated, thousands
would lose their lives for nothing . And the
original plan, sending Viserys in first, is
even more risky – loosing thousands of Dothraki
“savages” on Westeros would be terribly
destructive and cause lots of long term problems.
And what if Viserys actually succeeded in
taking over Westeros? He could do all sorts
of damage and it’s not like he’d happily
hand over the crown when Aegon showed up.
Varys’ supposed plan for peace involves
an awful lot of war and destruction and risk,
and he’s actively sabotaged several other
much safer opportunities for a peaceful realm
to pursue it.
It seems obvious that Varys and Illyrio’s
true goal isn’t just a peaceful realm, but
a realm ruled by Aegon. But why? Why does
a eunuch from Myr and a merchant from Pentos,
men with no apparent connections to Westeros
or the Targaryens , work so hard to put Aegon
Targaryen on the Iron Throne? Tyrion asks
this of Illyrio in Dance, and Illyrio says
he hopes to get money out of it, but Tyrion
thinks he’s a “Liar”, that “There
is something in this venture worth more to
[him] than coin or castles”, and Illyrio
admits that “even fat old fools like [him]
have friends, and debts of affection to repay”
. What are these “debts of affection”,
who are these friends? Could they explain
the real reasons why Varys and Illyrio want
Aegon on the Throne? The answers may lie in
a theory called the Blackfyre theory.
To cover some history real quick – bout
a hundred and twenty years ago, the King of
Westeros was Aegon the Fourth Targaryen, called
“the Unworthy” (waynew) because he was
one of the worst Kings the realm had ever
had. He was corrupt, and cruel , full of greed
and lust . He fathered dozens of bastards,
including Brynden Rivers, or “Bloodraven”,
now known as the “three-eyed crow”, and
Shiera Seastar, who may be related to Quaithe,
and Aegor Rivers, called “Bittersteel”,
and Daemon Rivers, who took the name Blackfyre,
and a black dragon as his heraldry. On King
Aegon’s deathbed, he legitimised all his
bastards , which gave them some claim on the
Throne . Aegon’s trueborn son Daeron still
should have been the rightful heir, but that
was disputed by Daemon, who called himself
King, and fought a war with Daeron for the
Throne. Daemon was killed in this First Blackfyre
Rebellion, but Bittersteel, who supported
him, fled Westeros, founded a mercenary company
called the Golden Company, and swore to put
a Blackfyre on the Iron Throne . Over the
next fifty years, there were five more Blackfyre
rebellions, some led by Bittersteel and his
Golden Company, until finally, in the Fifth
Blackfyre Rebellion, a young Ser Barristan
Selmy killed Maelys the Monstrous – “the
last Blackfyre”. Or at least, we’re told
that Maelys is “the last Blackfyre” – but
he was apparently only the last of the male
line of House Blackfyre , which might imply
the female line is still alive. Many fans
believe that Aegon is a descendant of that
female line – that he’s not really a Targaryen,
but a Blackfyre. And there’s strong evidence
supporting this idea.
And we’re repeatedly warned in visions and
prophecies of a “false” dragon , or “the
mummer’s dragon” – a mummer’s dragon
is a cloth dragon on poles used in performances
. And of course, Varys is closely linked to
mummers – he was raised by them, taught
by them, and constantly uses their skills
of acting and illusion. So the idea here is
that Aegon is the mummer’s dragon, the “false”
black dragon who Varys presents as a Targaryen
even though he’s actually a Blackfyre. Which
fits perfectly with Varys’ talk of power
and belief and perception – he says that
“Power resides where men believe it resides”
– and men believe that power resides in
Targaryen blood – no matter if the boy is
actually a Blackfyre. Another little symbolic
hint is a story we’re told about a black
iron dragon that was used as the sign for
an inn, until someone broke it and threw it
away because it looked like the Blackfyre
dragon, but “many years later”, part of
it washed up, and the black iron had gone
“red with rust”. This alludes to the story
of Aegon – the black dragon, House Blackfyre,
was seemingly destroyed years ago, but a survivor
has now emerged, disguised as a red dragon
– a Targaryen.
But probably the strongest evidence for the
Blackfyre theory concerns the Golden Company,
the army that joins Aegon in his invasion
of Westeros in Dance. It is super fuckin weird
for the Golden Company to fight for Aegon
Targaryen, because the Golden Company was
founded by Bittersteel to fight against the
Targaryens, for the Blackfyres – they fought
in the Blackfyre Rebellions, they were led
by Blackfyres . They are “A brotherhood
of exiles … united by the dream of Bittersteel”
– and the dream of Bittersteel was to defeat
the Targaryens and put a Blackfyre on the
Iron Throne . So why would the Golden Company
fight for Aegon Targaryen? Tyrion questions
Illyrio about this , and Illyrio “brushe[s]
away the objection as if it were a fly”,
saying eh, Blackfyre, Targaryen, tomato tomato,
all the Company really wants is to go home
to Westeros . Which is, like, maybe, but that
seems to contradict Illyrio’s earlier claim
that the Golden Company fights for Aegon because
of a contract “writ in … blood” – which
sounds like it refers to the Golden Company’s
history with the Blackfyres. So there is a
lot of uncertainty and secrecy here, but given
what we know about the Golden Company, and
given all these hints about the Blackfyres,
and the “mummer’s dragon”, it seems
likely that the Golden Company fights for
Aegon Targaryen because they know he’s secretly
a Blackfyre.
Some versions of the theory go further, suggesting
that Aegon might not only be a Blackfyre,
but that he might be Illyrio’s son. Illyrio
clearly has affection for Aegon – he’s
really sad that he doesn’t get to spend
time with him , he praises him , gives him
little gifts of his favourite food , he even
has a chest of children’s clothes in his
home , that may have been Aegon’s when he
was younger. Maybe Illyrio treats Aegon like
this cause Aegon’s his son. Aegon’s Blackfyre
blood would come from Illyrio’s now-dead
wife, Serra – who had “pale golden hair
streaked by silver”, like a Blackfyre, and
a name that sounds like a Targaryen or Blackfyre
name . Serra may be this Blackfyre survivor
through the female line, and the mother of
Aegon Blackfyre with Illyrio. The evidence
for this idea isn’t very strong, but it
would go a long way in explaining why Illyrio
wants Aegon to be King. Illyrio deeply loved
Serra, he sacrificed a lot of political power
and status to be with her , and after she
dies of greyscale, he keeps her petrified,
stony hands as a keepsake – which is quite
creepy, but it’s also a clear expression
of passionate love. Maybe Serra wanted for
her son Aegon what all her Blackfyre ancestors
had failed to claim – the Iron Throne of
Westeros. It might even have been a “Promise
me, Ned” sort of a situation – maybe as
Serra was slowly dying of greyscale, she got
her husband Illyrio to swear to honour her
memory by granting her son his – perceived
– birthright – the Throne.
This also could give Varys a pretty good person
reason to support Aegon Blackfyre – Varys
is a close friend to Illyrio, and may also
have been close with Serra, so it makes sense
that he might want to help support Aegon.
Some people even suggest that Varys and Serra
might be related – brother and sister, perhaps.
After all, they both happen to come from Lys,
and they both happen to end up with Illyrio
in Pentos. Maybe Varys shaves his head to
hide the pale blonde hair that he may share
with Serra. There’s a hint for this in that
another character who shaves his head bald
is Egg, in Dunk and Egg. Egg shaves his head
to hide his Valyrian-blonde hair, and when
Varys is introduced in the first book, he
is “plump, perfumed, powdered, and as hairless
as an egg”. Also, having Blackfyre blood
might explain why Varys was castrated in a
magic fire ritual – we know that fire magic
in this series sometimes requires king’s
blood , and if Varys is a descendent of the
Targaryens and Blackfyres, he has king’s
blood – maybe that’s why he was bought
by the sorcerer in the first place. One more
thing is that we’re told that “Only the
blood of the dragon would ever know the secrets
of the [Red Keep]” – specifically its
secret passageways, and as it happens, Varys
knows those secrets very well . So it’s
possible that Varys is Serra’s Blackfyre
brother. But even if he’s not, even if he’s
only a close friend of Serra and Illyrio,
these connections could help make Varys and
Illyrio’s grand plan make a whole lot more
sense.
Because the story we’re told, that Varys
“serves the realm” and just wants peace,
doesn’t make sense – Varys has actively
undermined three potentially peaceful regimes,
and he’s taken huge, dangerous risks, orchestrated
whole wars, all to crown a teenager who might
not actually make a good king. Could this
really be the ultimate goal of this master
player of the game of thrones? All this stuff
about “debts of affection”, and the Blackfyres,
and familial connections, hint that there
might be a deeper layer to Varys as a character.
Cause all this time, Varys has seemed to be
so dispassionate, so cold and calculating
. People see him as creepy , almost inhuman
– not as a man, but a sinister, all-seeing
Spider , and a eunuch besides – Cersei says
that the reason why Varys is “so dangerous”
is that “He doesn’t have a cock” – implying
that he lacks the passions, and desires, and
weaknesses, that motivate other people . And
Varys plays this up, saying oh, “no one
loves a eunuch”, “they sing no songs for
spiders”, and in the show it’s suggested
clearly that he has no “desire”, which
leaves him free to work towards higher, rational
goals like a peaceful realm. But maybe there’s
more to Varys than this cold, rational exterior
. After all, he grew up with actors , he’s
a master of disguise , he talks endlessly
about the power of illusion , and he says
quite explicitly that his role as a “sly”
unscrupulous spy is an act . Maybe behind
the act, behind the illusions, and the lies
, is a man, just a man, with human passions
– someone who works out of love for his
friends and family. George Martin says the
only thing worth writing about is “the human
heart in conflict with itself” . A cold,
rational, scheming Spider who manipulates
politics and orchestrates wars for purely
cold, rational reasons is not “the human
heart in conflict with itself”. A much better
story is that of a man who was born alone
into the world , who was betrayed at a young
age , who was cut , and beaten , and suffered,
and so learned to cherish the family he had
. A man who used illusion and deception to
play the part of a passionless eunuch who
only “serve[s] the realm”, all the while
secretly working, over years and years, out
of love for his family – Illyrio, Serra,
and Aegon. Maybe this could be revealed in
a climactic, dramatic scene where Varys’s
plans come crashing down, perhaps even the
scene of Varys’ death, imagine – a sudden,
tragic, bittersweet realisation that this
evil scheming spider, who stole, and lied,
and started wars, and killed good men, who
turned the whole damn realm into his puppet
show – did what he did out of love.
Either that, or he’s a merman.
Thanks for watching. This video has drawn
from the ideas of the Song of Ice and Fire
fan community. There are links in the description
to relevant essays and posts – the series
by BryndenBFish of Wars and Politics of Ice
and Fire was especially influential on this
video. Thanks also to all the Patrons supporting
this channel on Patreon. If you’d like to
support this channel, please pledge at patreon.com/AltShiftX.
Cheers.